let me start off with the way that
everybody is introduced to money whether
you studied economics or not I'm sure
you got this story I can remember when
my daughter was in first grade and she
came to me and told me this story and I
said well actually that's not quite
right that yes it is daddy that's what
the teacher said so you get it from a
very young age
it begins with barter we've got Robinson
Crusoe
he's shipwrecked he meets Friday
Crusoe knows how to grow grain Friday
knows how to fish so they barter but
this can be very inconvenient because it
requires that on the day that a Friday
wants to deliver a fish Crusoe actually
wants a fish and he's willing to trade
grain for it so the story is that it
requires a double coincidence of wants
so it's inconvenient
they search around for something to act
as a medium of exchange they might begin
with seashells but through some
evolutionary process they end up with
gold which has some nice characteristics
that make it a very good medium of
exchange it's very valuable it doesn't
rot and on and on and on so this greatly
reduces the transactions costs involved
in barter there is one problem with gold
it is extremely valuable you got to
worry about people who will try to take
away your gold stock so you start
storing it with the Goldsmith's
the Goldsmith's already had that problem
they had to protect the gold stock that
they're using to make jewelry they have
safes and so on and so you would deposit
your gold with the gold stuff with the
Goldsmith the Goldsmith gives you a
receipt people discover that they
actually can use those receipts and
payments rather than using the gold
because individuals who accept them know
that they can go get the gold out of the
Goldsmith's safe whenever they want the
Goldsmith in turn realizes that he
actually doesn't have to keep the gold
in the same
he only needs to keep a little bit
because those receipts are not all going
to come back on the same day okay so he
discovers what we now call the deposit
expansion process you can issue lots of
receipts and hold just a little bit of
gold maybe 10% for safekeeping to redeem
on demand those Goldsmith's become the
banks so that's the story okay what is
money in this view I want to say
something about the nature of money and
I'm going to contrast it with the MMT
view money comes about to lubricate the
market it's more efficient than barter
specific money denominated assets
fulfill that function medium of exchange
exactly which kinds of things fulfill
that function changes over time for a
very long time it was supposedly was
gold okay but gradually we have changed
those money things that fulfill that
function but still today the focus is on
money as a medium of exchange there are
other functions that money serves but
those derived from the medium of
exchange function so medium of exchange
is the most important function of money
okay what is wrong with this Orthodox
story I know that I am being very quick
explaining the dominant paradigm on
money and banking what's wrong with it
first there's actually no evidence of
barter based markets and I don't know if
any of you have read David Graeber book
this was just a fantastic success and
unimaginable success debt the first
5,000 years everybody bought this book
okay it was a runaway bestseller
it's like 5,000 pages long it's the kind
of book everybody buys and probably
hardly anybody reads including me I've
got it on my shelf maybe when I retire
I'll finally get the time to read it
okay but what David
shows is that as when we look around the
world as far back as we go you just do
not find any economies anywhere
based on barter they just do not exist
and what we actually find when we look
at history and I knew this long long
long before Graber is that money
actually pre-exists markets money was
not invented as a transactions cost
minimizing device for markets that
already existed money pre-exists markets
okay
money is as old as writing how do we
know that the very first written records
are all about money okay
basically writing was not invented by
poets it was invented by accountants to
keep track of money values so money
exists before markets so there's
something wrong with that part of the
story and even the Austrians who pushed
for a very long time this barter story
they now admit that once you get beyond
about ten people and ten different
commodities it's very hard for market
higgling and haggling to settle on a a
single commodity that will serve as
money if you're talking about many
commodities and many people involved
unless you add modern computing power
you're not going to select a single
commodity to serve as your money
commodity and finally from the very
beginning the evidence shows that
authorities were always involved in the
monetary system in creating the monies
of account I'll come back to that
so authorities were always there it
wasn't Robinson Crusoe and Friday that
invented money it came out of the
authorities another problem story is
modern money has no intrinsic value this
is a little bit hard to explain when
your whole story was about choosing a
commodity that was very valuable that
could serve as your money commodity okay
today's monies
are not attached to any commodities they
have no intrinsic values and neither did
ancient money in spite of the goldsmith
story as far back as you go the money
things did not have intrinsic values
usually okay there's an infinite regress
problem what people will do then as they
say well yes in the past it was gold
that gave money value but today it is
trust asking what is the trust and the
money they say well I trust that Billy
Bob will take it from me in payment I
trust I can go to the grocery store and
someone will take it okay in my view
that's a very thin argument to base the
most important institution we have in
modern economies which is money on trust
and also there is no circular flow that
can explain where the money comes from
how does it get into the economy so I'm
going to present an alternative this is
sort of it so where did money come from
we do not know and we will not know
nobody sat down and wrote a memo today I
invented money in this house this is how
I did it we're not gonna find that
because money pre-existed writing as I
said the first writing already is
talking about money so we're not gonna
know we have to speculate the most
convincing speculating I've ever seen is
done by the most famous coin collector
in the world who's I mean he beyond
collecting studied coins was a guy named
Philip Grierson at University of
Cambridge in England when he died he
donated all the coins which were worth a
fortune to the University of Cambridge
he speculated that actually money came
out of the ancient tribal practice
that's called vert gild now that was
applied to the Germans Roman society was
civilized Germany was still a tribal
society the Romans studied the German
tribal society so we know a lot about
how it functioned but anthropologists
find that every tribal society they come
across also has this very geld tradition
if you cause an injury to someone else
okay here whoops
killed the guy a fine is imposed on you
and you have to pay a fine to the
victim's family
okay these fines were in kind it would
depend on what the injury was that would
determine what you had to pay whether
it's a goat or a cow or a horse or sheep
or chicken
Oh as far back as there was tribal
society and humans came out of tribal
society so it's as old as humans okay
when did they come up with the idea and
why did they come up with it we don't
know when but it's obvious why they did
it to stop blood feuds otherwise you
have the Hatfields and the McCoys
killing each other so this is to stop
retribution you had to pay a fine so
Grierson's
notion was that the concept of valuing
things came out of the very guild
tradition it was a huge jump because
very guild you pay a cow versus a
chicken depending on the damages you had
done money allows you to compare those
things Oh chick it takes a hundred
chickens value to equal one cow he
thinks that's where money came from it's
a big intellectual jump bigger than any
measuring jump we had ever done before
because the measurements before money
always were lengths what's the link foot
whose foot the King's foot okay or qubit
and so on those were those are
relatively easy now a hint is that every
ancient money unit was the name of a
great grain weight unit shekel lira
pound those are all weight units they
all came out of measuring grain so
someone had the idea let's use the grain
measurement in order to measure the
value of everything by Babylonian times
this is exactly what they did and then
the price lists the equivalents to the
mina which was a grain weight unit was
posted at the temple that is how you
knew the value of everything it was set
by the temple's authorities I'll come
back to religion because it's important
for money
okay alternative what is money
yeah I will it is a state monopoly it is
a social unit of measurement if you're
in America you can point to anything you
can ask people what is that worth
they're not gonna tell you in terms of
chickens they're gonna tell you in terms
of dollars almost everything can be
valued in terms of dollars now not quite
everything but as capitalism develops a
greater and greater range of things are
measured in terms of money it is a state
money of account almost without
exception the money unit of account that
we use comes from the state every time a
new country is formed it chooses its own
money of account why did we get the
dollar in the u.s. because we didn't
want the pound okay we just revolted
we chose the dollar and we modeled our
currency after the Spanish currency to
thumb our nose is it England and then we
have money records there's a hierarchy
of these io u--'s denominated in the
state money of account there is bank
money okay and there are your io u--'s
they're all denominated in the US dollar
in America the form that they take
depends on technology I'll come back to
this paper money coin money electronic
money that is just the technological way
of recording the tally sticks the use of
the currency and value money are based
on the power of the issuing authority
not on the intrinsic value okay
the currency does not have to have any
intrinsic value it's based on the power
of the issuing authority the the
currency itself R is a record of debts
whether it's printed on paper or stamped
on a coin it's a record of a debt it is
a promise to redeem and I'll say more
about what Redemption means the state
played the central role in the evolution
of money from the very beginning it
always has played the central role what
we typically find
we look around the world today and we
look back as far back as we can go about
five to six thousand years into the past
what we find is the one state or one
nation one currency rule each nation or
state has its own currency when the
Soviet Union falls apart every one of
the former members chooses its own
currency okay in the past the exceptions
to this rule were extremely small and
virtually irrelevant the Vatican State
used the Italian lira okay that was an
exception minor
the only major exception to this rule is
euro land it was an experiment in an
exception and it's been disastrous okay
before the euro this is what we find
it's not a coincidence it's tied up with
sovereign power political independence
and fiscal authority this is why every
new nation adopts own currency and
finally taxes drive money taxes are what
gives value it's money it is the power
to impose taxes that is the important
sovereign power that insures the
currency has value
you